---
published: false
---
---
layout: post
Title: Numbers
published: true
---

I am a mathematician. When I meet a civilian, a non mathematician, they often say they hated  math at school and talk about some problem with numbers. I have to explain that math is not really about numbers but about sets, logic, categories, algebra, analysis and geometry. Some are surprised when I tell them that, on an average day,  I hardly do any arithmetic. My favorite days are spent dreaming of triangles, circles and eldritch curves in an imagined universe from which  the laws of euclidean geometry have been banished. Some numbers inevitably sneak in - pi, zero, one, minus one, the square root of minus one, Euler’s number “e” and of course infinity. These are my seven magic numbers. Mystical as each of these numbers are for me,  I can tell you their origins, properties, and more importantly the precise relations that they satisfy.


There are many who fall under an enchantment when numbers come  into a discussion. Unequipped as they are to manipulate numbers, to reason with them, one can charm these poor souls by simply sprinkling a discourse with figures plucked from a variety of “official” sources. Any vestiges of scepticism wither in the face of even a small band of statistics. The sophisticated politician tactically deploys his figures to disarm journalists and the public. 

As children we used to muse ourselves by doing birthdate numerology. One calculates  a digit by repeatedly adding the digits of someone’s birthday. This digit it is claimed reveals some characteristic or other of the person and might even be used to determine their fate. This recipe or algorithm seems quaint now but these things never quite die out. What is the science behind this digit? Clearly none whatsoever.

It is when discussing the world of the economy that the mystical power of numbers reaches its climax. The high priests of the discipline have invented all sorts of indices to track economic activity - inflation rate, growth rates, interest rates, gross national product, money supply, the stock market indices. Movements in these numbers are alternately celebrated or lamented. They are inspected and analysed in a fashion that recalls a Roman haruspex reading the future in the bloody entrails of ritual sacrifices. 

Three percent is one such figure. It is the limit set on a nation’s debt as a fraction of its gross domestic product in the European Union’s Stability and Growth Pact. It is a norm that sets out what is considered to be prudent, good behavior for those who decide economic policy. What is the science behind this number? To answer this question one must track down its origins, the genesis of a norm.

The French economist, Guy Abeille was the father of the 3% rule and he admits: “On a imaginé ce chiffre de 3% en moins d'une heure, il est né sur un coin de table, sans aucune réflexion théorique.” Literally they came up with it in less than an hour without any scientific reasoning. He goes on to say that it had to be simple, a whole number, that 2.6 wouldn’t do and that three was perfect: “C'est un bon chiffre, un chiffre qui a traversé les époques, cela faisait penser à la Trinité”. My god.

Of course I have my semi scientific targets. I shouldn’t weigh more than 70kg, my heart rate must be less than 55 in the morning, no more than a half bottle of wine and no less than 30 minutes of exercise per day.. These are harmless norms that concern only me. But the holy three percent has wrecked havoc in Europe.

