---
layout: post
title: Mortality I 
published: true
---

Death is a funny thing. We know it’s coming but we try to avoid thinking about it. Society has medicalised  death, formalised and abstracted  it so that individually we only have to contemplate  death rarely - when a close relative passes away or one of the great and good dies. They have their 15 minutes of celebrity post mortem and perhaps an appearance in  the obituary columns buried in the depths of the Times.

It wasn’t always like that. Not so long ago life was quite brutal. Death was commonplace - mothers died in childbirth, children died before starting school, fathers and brothers died young in accidents at work or at war. For my parent’s generation these things were not mere words decorating the pages of a Dickens’ novel but harsh reality. They dealt with it often turning to religion not just in those passing moments of grief as we do now but regularly. 

I don’t know when I was conscious of my own mortality. Very young certainly. An uncle  died of cancer when I was six so I knew about real death then. Around that time I remember becoming obsessed by the ancient Egyptians and their quest for immortality. Their religion seemed to be devoted to the preservation of the soul in the after life. The pyramids were the most spectacular manifestation of this. The folly inherent in  their construction has never ceased to  impress. me. Those thousands of slaves toiling in the sun, hauling millions of massive blocks of stone to erect a mausoleum for the living god that was the Pharaoh. How could a poor child not be  fascinated by the sight of the magnificent treasures stored away for his future in the next world. I spent hours watching TV documentaries and reading books on the Egyptian preparations for death - everything from  cunning design of  tombs to mummification, hermetic rites, the book of the dead and the cult of Osiris. Most days I’d build a pyramid from Lego so I could marvel at its geometric perfection and the futility of the egyptian quest for immortality.

I don’t know quite when I realised that it was futile but I did. For at some point in my childhood I became more interested in Buddhism and so my Egyptian period faded. I had understood that Buddhists believed in reincarnation, in rebirth but perhaps not in a human form. The idea of persistence in some form or other seems a nice idea but even as a child I could see the problems. Being reborn sounds great but if I have lost all my memories and  skills acquired through graft then what is it really worth? What is left of the soul if the traces of the events  that shaped me are wiped clean? Would I have to suffer all over again to learn to read and write? And so my dalliance with reincarnation was short lived.

My pre-teen years were spent consuming masses of science fiction. The authors imagined myriad ways to cheat death, to achieve immortality. Perhaps the most elegant of these is Arthur C. Clarke’s in 2001 - the reincarnation of an astronaut as the  Star Child and his subsequent evolution into some sort of immortal energy being at one with the universe. My teens flashed by with all the hormone crises then my grandmother died just before I left for grad school. She was ancient, she always had been. When I was born she was already in her late seventies, hunched, wizened and slightly smelly. Proud as I was of her longevity surviving those final bedridden years, lost in senility as she was, were not an enticing prospect. I shuffled off to the funeral one early autumn morning then spent the afternoon drinking beer and playing pool with father, brother, uncle  in a bar. 

More than ten years went by  before I would be confronted with mortality again. I finished grad school, changed countries twice or three times. Far from home as I was now, phone calls brought news of the passing of  aunts and uncles, remote events that hardly had any real meaning at the time. Do I feel guilty? Perhaps a little now that even  my father is gone. None of these deaths touched me in my distant cosmopolitan. What did touch me was facing my own death for a fleeting moment. It was a crisp winter morning just before 9 and the sun was just creeping over the horizon. On my bike I passed a roundabout on  the university campus and had that  last corner before parking. At the last moment a car cut the corner and was coming towards me on my side of the road. There was no time. I couldn’t bail out on the grass to my right because the kerb was too high. So high that if I hit it I would fall and slide under the car. And now it was too late to get across to the left. There was really no time left and no other option but to  relax and let it hit me head on. It’s actually a wonderful  moment when you think that you have nothing to worry about ever again. Of course it didn’t last, the actual impact does not exist in my mind but waking painfully on the ground behind the car after being flung through the air does. People came to help, there was a trip to the hospital. I wasn’t so badly injured with just a  concussion, and a fractured skull. Who cares about the aftermath? But I often go back to that moment before. The moment when I was pretty sure it was finished.

The physical pain is mostly gone. My right shoulder is still a bit stiff sometimes, nothing worth bothering a doctor about but the feeling that I was as good as  dead lingers. 
